eXplainable Modeling (XM) - basic usage instructions

This software is meant to ease the interpretation of various clustering/modeling results.
This code has been developed at "Università degli studi di Verona", in Verona. Users can modify and/or distribute code free of charge, provided that this notice is retained.

INSTALLATION

- Run the script XM_v2.1/install.sh from a linux terminal. This should install the necessary libraries to make XM work.


GENERATION OF STATE-MODELS FROM A DATASET

The following example works on the dataset XM_v2.1/DATASETS/xm_test_data.csv:
- Run the python script XM_v2.1/generation.py to generate state-models for the acquatic drone dataset xm_test_data.csv
- To generate state-models for other datasets or different clustering methods and parameters modify the script generation.py


VISUALIZATION OF STATE-MODELS

- Enter the folder XM_v2.1 from a linux terminal
- Run the command "python3 XM.py"
- Follow the steps described in the presentation XM_v2.1/DOC/visualization_guide.pdf to perform a basic analysis of the state-models generated by the script generation.py (see above)


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOLDERS

List of folders contained in XM_v2.1:
DATASETS: contains dataset files.
IMG: contains images and icons.
DOC: contains documentation.
RESULTS: contains the results of clustering/modeling
MethodLib: contains the libraries of different methods for generating cluster/models.

- The folder named "SubCMediansLib" in "MethodLib/SubCMedians" contains all files related to the algorithm presented in "S. Peignier, C. Rigotti, A. Rossi, and G. Beslon. Weight-based search to find clusters around medians in subspaces. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC 2018. ACM, 471–480, 2018"
- The folder named "TICC" in "MethodLib" contains all files related to the algorithm presented in "Hallac, D., Vare, S., Boyd, S., Leskovec, J., Toeplitz inverse covariance-based clustering of multivariate time series data. In: Proc. 23rd ACM 1512 SIGKDD. KDD ’17. ACM, pp. 215–223, 2017".
- KMeans, GMM and Spectral Clustering methods come from the python machine learning library scikit-learn. 


XM CODE FILES

List of XM code files contained in XM_v2.1:
- "SU.py" contains the function defining the symmetrical uncertainty, an entropy based measure, used to sort variables.
- "VSF": vertical scrolled frame.
- "CheckBar": variables checkbar.
- "LoadingScreen": loading screen during tab switching.
- "MarkerUpdater": file to enlarge scatter points on zoom.
- "XM_clustering_results.py" defines all the functions used to draw graphs and tables. It also contains some utility functions regarding loading of files and datasets.
- "XM_only_data": very similar to XM_clustering_results but defines only method used to visualize only the dataset without loading a result.
- "XM.py" is the main file of this software. It builds the entire GUI.


AUTHORS

Alberto Castellini, Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Italy, email: alberto.castellini@univr.it

Alessandro Farinelli, Department of Computer Science, University of Verona, Italy, email: alessandro.farinelli@univr.it

Francesco Masillo (main developer), University of Verona, Italy, email: francesco.masillo@studenti.univr.it

